python-bindings/doc/security.rst, before:


Security considerations
=======================

Trusting user-defined functions to execute arbitrary code on someone else's computer
is always hard. All is fine until some malicious piece of code decides to explore the
filesystem and mess around with system resources and sensitive data. This is such an
important topic that several projects delegate dedicated teams to reduce the attack
surface of components that execute code from external parties.

Because users cannot tell in advance what a certain user-defined function is about to
do, HDF5-UDF uses a few mechanisms to limit what system calls the UDF can execute.

Seccomp
-------

We use the Linux ``Seccomp`` interface to determine which system calls UDFs are allowed
to invoke -- the UDF process is terminated if it tries to run a function that does not
belong to the allow-list. The following image shows the overall architecture of our
seccomp-based sandboxing.

.. image:: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lucasvr/hdf5-udf/master/images/hdf5-udf-seccomp.png


Note that even though one could use a static list of system calls allowed to execute,
that does not reflect real-world scenarios in which few people are trusted (and thus
should be OK to have access to a larger set of system calls than ordinary users). We
account for that situation by introducing the concept of :ref:`Trust profiles`.

Trust profiles
--------------

Starting with HDF5-UDF 2.0, a private and public key pair is automatically generated
and saved to the user's home directory (under ``~/.config/hdf5-udf``) the first time
a dataset is created. The files are named after the currently logged user name:

- ``~/.config/hdf5-udf/username.priv`` private key
- ``~/.config/hdf5-udf/username.pub``: public information: public key, email, and full
  name. The last two pieces of information are automatically assembled from ``hostname``
  and ``/etc/passwd``. Please review and adjust the file as you see fit

A directory structure providing different `trust profiles` is also created. Inside
each profile directory exists a JSON file which states the system calls allowed to
be executed by members of that profile. Three profiles are created:

- **default**: a sane configuration that allows memory allocation, opening files in
  read-only mode, writing to ``stdout`` and ``stderr``, and interfacing with the
  terminal device.
- **deny**: strict settings that simply allow writing to ``stdout`` and ``stderr``.
- **allow**: poses no restrictions. The UDF is treated as a regular process with
  no special requirements.

Signing UDFs
------------

UDFs are **automatically signed** at the time of their attachment to the HDF5 file.
The public key from ``username.pub`` and contact information from ``username.meta``
are incorporated as metadata and saved next to the UDF bytecode in the HDF5 file.

Associating UDFs with a trust profile
-------------------------------------

Self-signed UDFs are automatically placed on the ``allow`` profile. This means that
UDFs you create on your own machine will run, on that same machine, as a regular
process would.

HDF5 files with UDFs signed by a different user are automatically placed on the
``deny`` profile: the public key is extracted from the metadata and saved as
``~/.config/hdf5-udf/deny/foo.pub``. In other words, when you receive a file from
an unknown party and load a UDF dataset, the bytecode will not be able to perform
any actions that require the execution of system calls (other than writing to
``stdout`` and ``stderr``).

It is possible to change the trust level by simply **moving that public key to a
different profile directory**. The next time a UDF signed by that key is read,
the seccomp rules associated with that profile will be enforced.

.. image:: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lucasvr/hdf5-udf/master/images/profiles.png
   :width: 400
   :align: center

Commit message:

Documentation updates
Update pointers to project page, add a few words on the existence of a
filesystem access configuration file.

python-bindings/doc/security.rst, after:


Security considerations
=======================

Trusting user-defined functions to execute arbitrary code on someone else's computer
is always hard. All is fine until some malicious piece of code decides to explore the
filesystem and mess around with system resources and sensitive data. This is such an
important topic that several projects delegate dedicated teams to reduce the attack
surface of components that execute code from external parties.

Because users cannot tell in advance what a certain user-defined function is about to
do, HDF5-UDF uses a few mechanisms to limit what system calls the UDF can execute.

Seccomp
-------

We use the Linux ``Seccomp`` interface to determine which system calls UDFs are allowed
to invoke -- the UDF process is terminated if it tries to run a function that does not
belong to the allow-list. The following image shows the overall architecture of our
seccomp-based sandboxing.

.. image:: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lucasvr/hdf5-udf/master/images/hdf5-udf-seccomp.png


Note that even though one could use a static list of system calls allowed to execute,
that does not reflect real-world scenarios in which few people are trusted (and thus
should be OK to have access to a larger set of system calls than ordinary users). We
account for that situation by introducing the concept of :ref:`Trust profiles`.

Trust profiles
--------------

Starting with HDF5-UDF 2.0, a private and public key pair is automatically generated
and saved to the user's home directory (under ``~/.config/hdf5-udf``) the first time
a dataset is created. The files are named after the currently logged user name:

- ``~/.config/hdf5-udf/username.priv`` private key
- ``~/.config/hdf5-udf/username.pub``: public information: public key, email, and full
  name. The last two pieces of information are automatically assembled from ``hostname``
  and ``/etc/passwd``. Please review and adjust the file as you see fit

A directory structure providing different `trust profiles` is also created. Inside
each profile directory exists a JSON file which states the system calls allowed to
be executed by members of that profile. Three profiles are created:

- **deny**: strict settings that allow writing to ``stdout`` and ``stderr``,
  memory allocation, and basic process management (so the process can ``exit()``).
- **default**: a sane configuration that allows memory allocation, opening files in
  read-only mode, writing to ``stdout`` and ``stderr``, and interfacing with the
  terminal device.
- **allow**: poses no restrictions. The UDF is treated as a regular process with
  no special requirements.

The profile configuration files also state which filesystem paths can be accessed
by UDFs. An attempt to access a filesystem object not covered in the config file
causes the UDF to be terminated with `SIGKILL`.

Signing UDFs
------------

UDFs are **automatically signed** at the time of their attachment to the HDF5 file.
The public key from ``username.pub`` and contact information from ``username.meta``
are incorporated as metadata and saved next to the UDF bytecode in the HDF5 file.

Associating UDFs with a trust profile
-------------------------------------

Self-signed UDFs are automatically placed on the ``allow`` profile. This means that
UDFs you create on your own machine will run, on that same machine, as a regular
process would.

HDF5 files with UDFs signed by a different user are automatically placed on the
``deny`` profile: the public key is extracted from the metadata and saved as
``~/.config/hdf5-udf/deny/foo.pub``. In other words, when you receive a file from
an unknown party and load a UDF dataset, the bytecode will not be able to perform
any actions that require the execution of system calls (other than writing to
``stdout`` and ``stderr``).

It is possible to change the trust level by simply **moving that public key to a
different profile directory**. The next time a UDF signed by that key is read,
the seccomp rules associated with that profile will be enforced.

.. image:: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/lucasvr/hdf5-udf/master/images/profiles.png
   :width: 400
   :align: center
