INSTALL.md, before:

# Installing from the binary package

## Debian and Ubuntu

The HDF5-UDF package is hosted on a PPA repository. Please run the following
commands to include that PPA on the list of sources searched by `apt`:

```
$ apt install -y wget gnupg
$ echo "deb https://lucasvr.gobolinux.org/debian/repo/ /" >> /etc/apt/sources.list.d/internal.list
$ wget -q -O - https://lucasvr.gobolinux.org/debian/repo/KEY.gpg | apt-key add -
```

And then install the binary package (along with LuaJIT, if you want to
write and read UDFs written in the Lua language) with:

```
$ apt update
$ apt install -y hdf5-udf luajit
```

Last, but not least, make sure that the `cffi` Python package is installed so
that Python UDFs can run as expected:

```
$ pip3 install cffi
```

## Fedora and RHEL

We host the HDF5-UDF package on a YUM repository. Please run the following
commands to let your system search for packages on that location:

```
$ wget -q -O /etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-hdf5-udf https://lucasvr.gobolinux.org/fedora/repo/KEY.gpg
$ cat << EOF > /etc/yum.repos.d/hdf5-udf.repo
[HDF5-UDF]
name=HDF5-UDF RPM Server
baseurl=https://lucasvr.gobolinux.org/fedora/repo
enabled=1
gpgcheck=1
gpgkey=file:///etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-hdf5-udf
EOF
```

And now you are ready to install the package with YUM:

```
$ yum install -y hdf5-udf
```

Last, please make sure that the `cffi` Python package is installed with:

```
$ pip3 install cffi
```

## macOS

There is no binary package currently available for macOS. Still, it is possible
to build HDF5-UDF from the source code. The macOS port has been tested with
packages provided by [Homebrew](https://brew.sh). The following instructions
should get you started. Afterwards, please proceed to *Building from the source
code"* for the remaining steps.

```
$ brew install hdf5 pcre libsodium luajit-openresty meson pkgconfig
$ pip install cffi
```

Next, add these variables to your environment. It is suggested that you
also incorporate them into your `$HOME/.zshrc` or `$HOME/.bashrc` in case
you want to use the LuaJIT backend:

```
$ export PKG_CONFIG_PATH=$PKG_CONFIG_PATH:/usr/local/opt/luajit-openresty/lib/pkgconfig
$ export PATH=$PATH:/usr/local/opt/luajit-openresty/bin
```

## Windows

Please use the provided installer to have HDF5-UDF installed on your machine.
All backends are supported at this time, and choosing which of them to deploy to
your platform is a matter of clicking on the corresponding checkboxes.

The runtime engines are supported by MSYS2, which is automatically downloaded from
the project's repository and uncompressed on `C:\Program Files\HDF5-UDF\<version>\msys64`.
Hence, installation may take a little while depending on your Internet bandwidth.

The installer **appends** HDF5-UDF's installation path to the current user's `%PATH%`
so that the main utility and its libraries are automatically found. Still, depending
on your Windows version, you may need to manually **prepend** the installation path
so that the Python interpreter can be found. If you see an error message that reads
like this: `Python could not be found`, then please change `%PATH%` so that the
HDF5-UDF components come first in the list.

If you wish to embed Lua scripts on HDF5 files, you may also need to change your
`%LUA_PATH%` or to (1) create a new directory named `msys64/mingw64/bin/lua` and
then (2) copy the contents of `msys64/mingw64/share/luajit-2.1.0-beta/jit` to that
directory.


# Building from the source code

## Requirements

HDF5-UDF comes with three backends, each of which requiring different
pieces of software to allow the embedding of bytecode and their execution:

- `Lua`: requires the [LuaJIT](https://luajit.org/install.html) package
- `Python`: requires the [CFFI](https://pypi.org/project/cffi) module
- `C/C++`: requires the [GNU C++ compiler](https://gnu.org/software/gcc) or,
   alternatively, the [Clang compiler](https://clang.llvm.org).

It is possible to compile the code so that only a restricted number of system
calls can be executed by the user-defined functions. We rely on two packages
to limit what the UDF process can do:

- The [libseccomp](https://github.com/seccomp/libseccomp) library
- The [libsodium](https://libsodium.gitbook.io) package, used for UDF signing
  and mapping of foreign public keys to `seccomp` rules

Please follow your distribution instructions to install these packages.
Also, make sure that you install both regular and development packages.

## Building the code

We use the [Meson](https://mesonbuild.com) build system to manage compilation
options, dependency tracking, and installation of the compiled package. Please
follow these steps below to build and install HDF5-UDF.

### Configuration

Meson uses a dedicated build directory. We create one named `build` and
proceed with the configuration using these commands:

```
$ mkdir -p build
$ meson -Dwith-python=true -Dwith-lua=true -Dwith-cpp=true . build
```

At least one of `-Dwith-python=true`, `-Dwith-lua=true`, `-Dwith-cpp=true`, or
`-Dwith-gds=true` options must be set. It's still possible to build HDF5-UDF
without any of these backends, but that would be a useless outcome!

Support for sandboxing is strongly encouraged to be set, so it's enabled by default.
If you are conducting local tests and do not plan on reading datasets provided by
third-party, then it's possible to disable it with `-Dwith-sandbox=false`.

The installation prefix defaults to `/usr/local`, with the HDF5 I/O filter plugin
installed under `/usr/local/hdf5/lib/plugin`. The prefix can be changed by adding
`--prefix=/path/to/prefix` to the command line options. The plugin path can be set
with `--libexecdir=subdirectory/of/prefix`.

In order to use an alternative compiler, please set the `CXX` environment variable
so it points to that executable (e.g., `CXX=clang++`).

### Building

Simply run `ninja -C build` to compile the source code with the previously configured
options.

### Installing

Run `ninja -C build install` to effectively install HDF5-UDF on your filesystem.

Commit message:

GDS: Use the NVIDIA GPUDirect Storage VFD driver
This is a first step towards embracing the GDS VFD work led by John
Ravi. The only limitation of the GDS VFD is that it doesn't handle
chunked data (after all, handling of compressed data belongs to a
different HDF5 layer). Consequently, we are temporarily disabling
support for decompression of Snappy-CUDA data.

The HDF5-UDF code that currently handles chunked layout is going to
be moved to a separate project for improved code reuse.

INSTALL.md, after:

# Installing from the binary package

## Debian and Ubuntu

The HDF5-UDF package is hosted on a PPA repository. Please run the following
commands to include that PPA on the list of sources searched by `apt`:

```
$ apt install -y wget gnupg
$ echo "deb https://lucasvr.gobolinux.org/debian/repo/ /" >> /etc/apt/sources.list.d/internal.list
$ wget -q -O - https://lucasvr.gobolinux.org/debian/repo/KEY.gpg | apt-key add -
```

And then install the binary package (along with LuaJIT, if you want to
write and read UDFs written in the Lua language) with:

```
$ apt update
$ apt install -y hdf5-udf luajit
```

Last, but not least, make sure that the `cffi` Python package is installed so
that Python UDFs can run as expected:

```
$ pip3 install cffi
```

## Fedora and RHEL

We host the HDF5-UDF package on a YUM repository. Please run the following
commands to let your system search for packages on that location:

```
$ wget -q -O /etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-hdf5-udf https://lucasvr.gobolinux.org/fedora/repo/KEY.gpg
$ cat << EOF > /etc/yum.repos.d/hdf5-udf.repo
[HDF5-UDF]
name=HDF5-UDF RPM Server
baseurl=https://lucasvr.gobolinux.org/fedora/repo
enabled=1
gpgcheck=1
gpgkey=file:///etc/pki/rpm-gpg/RPM-GPG-KEY-hdf5-udf
EOF
```

And now you are ready to install the package with YUM:

```
$ yum install -y hdf5-udf
```

Last, please make sure that the `cffi` Python package is installed with:

```
$ pip3 install cffi
```

## macOS

There is no binary package currently available for macOS. Still, it is possible
to build HDF5-UDF from the source code. The macOS port has been tested with
packages provided by [Homebrew](https://brew.sh). The following instructions
should get you started. Afterwards, please proceed to *Building from the source
code"* for the remaining steps.

```
$ brew install hdf5 pcre libsodium luajit-openresty meson pkgconfig
$ pip install cffi
```

Next, add these variables to your environment. It is suggested that you
also incorporate them into your `$HOME/.zshrc` or `$HOME/.bashrc` in case
you want to use the LuaJIT backend:

```
$ export PKG_CONFIG_PATH=$PKG_CONFIG_PATH:/usr/local/opt/luajit-openresty/lib/pkgconfig
$ export PATH=$PATH:/usr/local/opt/luajit-openresty/bin
```

## Windows

Please use the provided installer to have HDF5-UDF installed on your machine.
All backends are supported at this time, and choosing which of them to deploy to
your platform is a matter of clicking on the corresponding checkboxes.

The runtime engines are supported by MSYS2, which is automatically downloaded from
the project's repository and uncompressed on `C:\Program Files\HDF5-UDF\<version>\msys64`.
Hence, installation may take a little while depending on your Internet bandwidth.

The installer **appends** HDF5-UDF's installation path to the current user's `%PATH%`
so that the main utility and its libraries are automatically found. Still, depending
on your Windows version, you may need to manually **prepend** the installation path
so that the Python interpreter can be found. If you see an error message that reads
like this: `Python could not be found`, then please change `%PATH%` so that the
HDF5-UDF components come first in the list.

If you wish to embed Lua scripts on HDF5 files, you may also need to change your
`%LUA_PATH%` or to (1) create a new directory named `msys64/mingw64/bin/lua` and
then (2) copy the contents of `msys64/mingw64/share/luajit-2.1.0-beta/jit` to that
directory.


# Building from the source code

## Requirements

HDF5-UDF comes with four backends, each of which requiring different
pieces of software to allow the embedding of bytecode and their execution:

- `Lua`: requires the [LuaJIT](https://luajit.org/install.html) package
- `Python`: requires the [CFFI](https://pypi.org/project/cffi) module
- `C++`: requires the [GNU C++ compiler](https://gnu.org/software/gcc) or,
   alternatively, the [Clang compiler](https://clang.llvm.org).
- `CUDA/GDS`: requires the [NVIDIA CUDA toolchain](https://developer.nvidia.com/cuda-zone)
   along with the [HDF5 GPUDirect Storage VFD](https://github.com/hpc-io/vfd-gds).

It is possible to compile the code so that only a restricted number of system
calls can be executed by the user-defined functions. We rely on two packages
to limit what the UDF process can do:

- The [libseccomp](https://github.com/seccomp/libseccomp) library
- The [libsodium](https://libsodium.gitbook.io) package, used for UDF signing
  and mapping of foreign public keys to `seccomp` rules

Please follow your distribution instructions to install these packages.
Also, make sure that you install both regular and development packages.

## Building the code

We use the [Meson](https://mesonbuild.com) build system to manage compilation
options, dependency tracking, and installation of the compiled package. Please
follow these steps below to build and install HDF5-UDF.

### Configuration

Meson uses a dedicated build directory. We create one named `build` and
proceed with the configuration using these commands:

```
$ mkdir -p build
$ meson -Dwith-python=true -Dwith-lua=true -Dwith-cpp=true . build
```

At least one of `-Dwith-python=true`, `-Dwith-lua=true`, `-Dwith-cpp=true`, or
`-Dwith-gds=true` options must be set. It's still possible to build HDF5-UDF
without any of these backends, but that would be a useless outcome!

Support for sandboxing is strongly encouraged to be set, so it's enabled by default.
If you are conducting local tests and do not plan on reading datasets provided by
third-party, then it's possible to disable it with `-Dwith-sandbox=false`.

The installation prefix defaults to `/usr/local`, with the HDF5 I/O filter plugin
installed under `/usr/local/hdf5/lib/plugin`. The prefix can be changed by adding
`--prefix=/path/to/prefix` to the command line options. The plugin path can be set
with `--libexecdir=subdirectory/of/prefix`.

In order to use an alternative compiler, please set the `CXX` environment variable
so it points to that executable (e.g., `CXX=clang++`).

### Building

Simply run `ninja -C build` to compile the source code with the previously configured
options.

### Installing

Run `ninja -C build install` to effectively install HDF5-UDF on your filesystem.
